[Merged by Bors] - Add otp.md and ibc.md (#1344)
ComposableFi/composable: xcvm/architecture/transports/otp.md

> # Open Transport Protocol

Reviewer: Add (OTP) at the end to make the acronym definition explicit

# Open Transport Protocol (OTP)

Although [IBC](./ibc.md) is the default and preferred transport method within the `XCVM`, we also support arbitrary third party protocols. The abstract interface for registration and participation in `XCVM` transactions is what we call `OTP`.

For a transport to be OTP compatible, it has to support the following operations:

1. Fungible token transfers.
2. Opaque data transfers.

Ideally, a protocol supports both in a single operation, although most bridges will need to be wrapped in an additional set of contracts to be fully compatible.

`OTP` handles the following operations:

1. Maintaining a blacklist of transports.
2. Ingress of messages on the chain.
3. Registration of routing.
4. Egress of messages on the chain. 

## Blacklist

The blacklist is used to enact emergency operations in case of bridge fraud, which can be caused by hacks, or bugs within the system. The blacklist globally disables bridges based on `LAYR` governance.

Note that the blacklist is not used to manage ecosystem specific risk, such as toxic assets. It only concerns itself with bridges where the message authenticity can no longer be guaranteed.

## XCVM Ingress

> A transport does not need to register itself to pass messages into the `XCVM`, it can do so directly, assuming that the interpreter instance accepting the transport's messages has whitelisted this transport. 

Reviewer 2: not clear what it means. is that chain which is initiator of XCVM, creates XCVM instance with whilelisted set of transports?  and then that list transferred to XCVM on receiving side chain?

Author: The receiving side needs to have it whitelisted first, so if a contract is automatically setting up instances, it would do so in the following way:

1. Create instructions and send to other chain over IBC
2. On other chain, execute instructions. One of these instructions should contain Call(XcvmInterpreter::SetFilter(address)), where address is a contract that has signature: fn(bridge, identity, program) -> result<bool, str>. If it is unset, the xcvm interpreter will check that bridge == ibc. If set to something custom, the 3rd party dev can do it based on the 3 inputs, e.g. accept programs over wormhole if the program does not contain Transfer.

The following diagram describes the flow of data (and funds) when OTP is used to for ingress of programs.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

>     Third-party transport->>Third-party OTP-adapter: Transform messsage.

Reviewer 2: message

    Third-party OTP-adapter->>Gateway: Transfer assets and pass program.
    Gateway->>Router: Add bridging info and transfer funds.

>     Note over Gateway: Accept/deny program based on blacklist.

Reviewer 2: is Gateway singleton per chain which is governed by LAYR?

Reviewer 2: so may be clarify what is on chain vs not in this diagram?

Author: Yeah, singleton (contract) per chain

## Registration of Routes

For a transport to be possible be selected by the Gateway to transfer messages to different chains, a more involved registration process is required. 

- A stake needs to be put down, which is used to reward disputers in case of bridge fraud.
- Metadata on the bridge must be provided, including 
    1. The `Account` of the administrator, used to deregister the bridge, and add routes.
    2. Destinations reachable through this bridge.

```
RegistrationInfo ::= Account [Destination]
Destination      ::= NetworkId [AssetId]
```

Immediately after registration, the bridge registration can be disputed for approximately 72 hours. The stake can be lost during this time, if governance determines that the registration is fraudulent. If a dispute is triggered, the registration can be delayed by up to 2 weeks.

#### Disputed Registration

The following diagram displays the sequence of a registration, including the dispute by a validator.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram

>     Third-party Transport->>Gateway: Register bridge for egress.

Reviewer 2: is Gateway will be only one chain as some root (Composable/Picasso), and stuff copied to other chains? I am thinkin about if XCVM will be initiated on other chains?

Author: No, we regularly deploy the contracts; and set the admin to Identity: (NetworkId::Composable, SomeContractAddress), which can then use IBC to configure the gateway further. `SomeContractAddress` can actually be our democracy pallet for example

    Note over Gateway: Dispute window is opened.
    Validator->>Gateway: Dispute the registration.
    Note over Validator, Gateway: Validator puts down a stake as well.
    Governance->>Gateway: Settle dispute.
```

Validators can be any entity, including a user triggering the dispute through our UI, as well as nodes automatically tracking registrations. For bridging teams, it is especially important to dispute registrations of your bridge with an incorrect administrator account.

## Egress of messages

Once a transport has been succesfully registered, it becomes accessible to the `Gateway`, which might route traffic based on transport requirements from the interpreter instance dispatching the program. By default, all OTP transports are considered `Trusted`, meaning that no traffic is routed through them unless specifically opted-in by the interpreter instance. 

> Later we may add means through governance to upgrade transports to the `Trustless` status using governance. This will accomodate transports such as `XCMP`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Later we may add means to upgrade transports to the `Trustless` status using governance. This will accomodate transports such as `XCMP`.
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    XCVM Interpreter->>Gateway: Spawn message with next destination
    Note over XCVM Interpreter,Gateway: Destination is annotated with transport requirements.
    Gateway->>Third-party Transport: Relay Spawn
```

### Fees

`XCVM` is relatively unopiniated about handling fees, leaving that up to the users by adding an output to reward the relayer. Read more on how we defined fees [here](../../SPEC.md#fees). 

A note on this, fees are specified by the program, meaning that the bridge itself cannot charge a fee directly on the `Assets` being transfered. The third-party OTP-adapter will need to take this into account, by possibly using internal APIs of the bridging contract to ensure that no fees are charged based on the `Assets` transferred.

## Reimbursements

When a transports fails to transmit a message (such as an IBC timeout or network congestion) the `Third-party Transport` issues a reimbursement to the `Gateway` which then informs the interpreter instance of the failure.

> For `OTP`-registerd transports, the reimbursement itself can be disputed as well. After issueing the reimbursement to the Gateway, a short-lived dispute window (hours) allows validators to dispute the reimbursement. This avoids the attack vector where a bridge has identified a contract which will retry a cross-chain operation until success, and extract value from that by issueing malicious reimbursements (a cross-chain re-entrancy attack).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For `OTP`-registered transports, the reimbursement itself can be disputed as well. After issuing the reimbursement to the Gateway, a short-lived dispute window (hours) allows validators to dispute the reimbursement. This avoids the attack vector where a bridge has identified a contract which will retry a cross-chain operation until success, and extract value from that by issuing malicious reimbursements (a cross-chain re-entrancy attack).
```

```

A new contract needs to be introduced to handle the requirement to compound the asset and data transfer, as well as reimbursements. We'll also make sure to have our adapter's contract address in the `Relayer` registry so that the fees can be fairly distributed to the multisig validators. 

#### Sequence diagram of incoming Spawn.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    Multisig Relayer->>Token Contract: Submit mint request.
    Token Contract->>Adapter: Transfer tokens.
    Multisig Relayer->>Adapter: Submit mint request.
    Multisig Relayer->>Adapter: Forward message.
    Note over Adapter: Waits for both message and assets to arive.
    Adapter->>Gateway: Initiate Spawn.
    Note over Adapter,Gateway: Sets the Relayer registry to self.
    Adapter->>Multisig Relayer: Transfer earned fees.
```

For outgoing messages, the pattern is very similar:

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    Gateway->>Adapter: Submit Spawn.
    Note over Gateway,Adapter: Selects based on destinations.
    Adapter->>Bridge Contract: Call transfer.
    Bridge Contract->>Multisig Relayer: Enact token transfer.
    Adapter->>Bridge Contract: Call message pass.

>     Bridge Contract->>Multisig Relayer: Enact token transfer.

Reviewer 2: Enact token transfer. > Enact message pass

    2. Destinations reachable through this bridge.

```
RegistrationInfo ::= Account [Destination]
Destination      ::= NetworkId [AssetId]
```

Immediately after registration, the bridge registration can be disputed for approximately 72 hours. The stake can be lost during this time, if governance determines that the registration is fraudulent. If a dispute is triggered, the registration can be delayed by up to 2 weeks.

#### Disputed Registration

The following diagram displays the sequence of a registration, including the dispute by a validator.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    Third-party Transport->>Gateway: Register bridge for egress.
    Note over Gateway: Dispute window is opened.
    Validator->>Gateway: Dispute the registration.
    Note over Validator, Gateway: Validator puts down a stake as well.
    Governance->>Gateway: Settle dispute.
```

Validators can be any entity, including a user triggering the dispute through our UI, as well as nodes automatically tracking registrations. For bridging teams, it is especially important to dispute registrations of your bridge with an incorrect administrator account.

## Egress of messages

> Once a transport has been successfully registered, it becomes accessible to the `Gateway`, which might route traffic based on transport requirements from the interpreter instance dispatching the program. By default, all OTP transports are considered `Trusted`, meaning that no traffic is routed through them unless specifically opted-in by the interpreter instance. 

Reviewer: Once a transport has been registered, the selection is solemnly based on the xcvm program requirement. For instance, deterministic relayers should be interchangeable

> Once a transport has been successfully registered, it becomes accessible to the `Gateway`, which might route traffic based on transport requirements from the interpreter instance dispatching the program. By default, all OTP transports are considered `Trusted`, meaning that no traffic is routed through them unless specifically opted-in by the interpreter instance. 

Author: Not specified yet; although it will be some form of:

1. Prefer IBC
2. Then XCM
3. Then OTP, based on performance, fee and stake(?).
